How the Subatomic particles and their location in the atom was discovered
Dalton's atomic model which presented the atom as a solid  indivisible mass
 was replaced by by J.J. Thomson's plum pudding model following the discovery of electron.
 According to the plum pudding model, the positively charged proton were uniformly distributed 
 in the atom. The negatively charged  electrons were randomly imbedded in this bed of positive
 protons. The electrons were like the fruit in plum pudding while the protons were like the batter.

 The experiment that led to the discovery of electrons.
 J.J. Thomson discovered the electrons in an experiment he conducted using cathode ray tube.
The cathode is a small glass tube. One end of the tube contained two charged metal plates: 
negatively charged cathode
and the positively charged anode. The cathode and the another were separated by a short distance
and a hole was drilled in the anode through which the cathode rays which originates from the
cathode will pass. The other end of the tube was painted with a substance called "phosphor" which 
glows when hit by charged particles. This makes it possible to see the point at which the cathode
rays strikes the screen. The cathode ray tube was then placed between two oppositely 
charged metal plates.
Thomson then observed that the cathode rays originating from the cathode were bent upwards
towards the positive metal plate and away from the  negative metal plate suggesting that they 
were negatively charged. No matter which element that served as the cathode, Thomson observed that
the same negative particles with the same properties such as charge and mass were produced, suggesting
that all atoms possessed the same type of cathode rays. 
In addition to discovering the electrons, Thomson also measured their charge to mass ratio.
He further proposed that since the atom was electrically neutral and also contains electrons, then
the atoms must also contain components  that are positively charged. It was this positively
charged components that cancels the charge on the electrons making the atom electrically neutral. 
Using Thomson'S data and the charge of the electron which he measured with in the oil drop experiment,
Robert Milikan  calculated the mass of the electron. The mass of the electron is 1.98 * 10-28,about 
1/1800 amu. or about 2000 times less than the mass of protons and neutrons.
The positive components which Thomson hinted at was latter isolated by James Chadwick.

discovery of the atomic nucleus
experiment by Rutherford later showed that jj Thomson's plum pudding model
of the atom was not completely correct.
Yes it is true that the atom is divisible and contains smaller
particles as Thomson had proposed but the electrons are not floating on a bed of positive charges.
Instead the positive charge is located in the central part of the atom, a very small dense mass
called nucleus. The electrons are located outside the nucleus and circle around the nucleus the way 
planets rotate around the sun.
This model of atom with a central nucleus surrounded by orbiting
 electrons is called the Rutherford'S OR planetary or 
Nuclear model of the atom.

Rutherford's Gold Foil experiment.
Ernest Rutherford discovered the atomic nucleus by firing alpha particles at very thin piece of 
gold foil. Alpha particles are positively charged particles 
identical to the nucleus of helium-4 atom. Alpha particles consists  of two protons and two neutrons 
bound together in the nucleus giving them  a mass of about 4 amu. The gold atom has a mass of has 79 protons and
about 197 amu. If the protons in the gold atom were evenly distributed in the atom the
way J.J. Thomson HAD proposed, the alpha particles will encounter little or resistance and all 
and all of them should go straight through without any change in direction. After all, the mass
 of a proton is about 1 amu while that of an alpha particle is about 4 amu. This is nearly what
happened. Ernest Rutherford observed that most alpha particles shot at the gold foil went
straight through without any change in direction. In addition, he also observed that few of the 
them bent away from the gold foil while even fewer bounced backed in the opposite direction.
From his observations, Rutherford argued that the alpha particles that bounced backed must have
encountered a mass that is heavier than not only the protons but also the alpha particles. The 
alpha particles that were deflected at a slight angle must have also come closer to this mass
but was not not attracted to it but was repelled by it. Since opposite charges attract while like 
charges repel Rutherford reasoned that this "heavy mass" must  be of  the same charge as the alpha particles.
Rutherford CALLED THIS heavy mass nucleus and then proposed a model of atom in which the
the atom contains mostly of 
empty space(to account for majority of the alpha particles that went straight through) and 
 has a positively charge central nucleus while the electrons circled around nucleus 
the way planets circled around the sun.

The deflects of the Rutherford's planetary model of the atom.

Rutherford's idea of a cental atomic nucleus was strongly accepted and still holds but 
his proposal about the position of the electrons was not accepted.  Rutherford'S planetary electrons
did not behave like a classical charged particle in circular motion. It was already known that 
when a charged particle such as an electron moves in a circular path, it gives off some form of light
and lose energy collapsing in the process bUT tHE electrons in the atom does not collapse.
Secondly Rutherford's model was unable to explain the emission spectrum of the atom.

Emission spectrum
The  emission spectrum is the unique pattern of light given off by an element when it is
given energy in form of heat or electricity. The emission spectrum is unique to each element and 
therefore can be used to identify it. Rutherford'S model WAS unable TO explain THIS PHEnomenon.




