The periodic table
The periodic table is a tabular arrangements of elements. Elements are substances which consists 
of only one kind of matter or atoms and can not be broken down into simpler units by ordinary chemical
reaction. About 109 elements are known. 92 of these elements  occur naturally while the
rest can only be synthesized in the laboratory.Each of these elements has a unique atomic number.
It does not share these number with any other element. This is the number of protons in
in the nucleus of the atom. The modern Periodic Law states that
the properties of the elements are a periodic function of their atomic number.
 To be a good chemist you have to be familiar with 
the elements. After all,  it is only when elements are chemically or physically 
combined together that the matter that
actually most matters to us such as food, clothing, air, water  materializes. 
Therefore you should know the elements: their names, symbols, the groups, periods,
 families and blocks they can be found in the periodic table, their electron configuration and 
 the compounds they form. I have included app called guess the element game to help you. The app
 won't turn you to a master of the elements overnight of course. But i believe it will make
 learning the element more interesting. 
 How the app works
 Begin the game by clicking on the start game button. When you take this action, one 
 of the 109 elements will be picked randomly by the algorithm. A clue about this selected 
 element will be shown  to you. Then you take the next action by identifying the 
 element. You can only make a maximum of three attempts at identifying the element.
If your first action at identifying the element was unsuccessful, the algorithm will
 continue to give you more hints about the element until you have exhausted all  chances.
 Okay back to the periodic table.

Groups and periods.
The periodic table arranges  elements in rows and columns as shown in the table below.
Table table 1 is the full blown periodic table while Table is a blueprint of the the periodic
table showing the exact location of the various groups and families found in the 
periodic table. Take a thorough look at the two tables.

Groups. 
There are eight vertical columns called the main groups. The groups are numbered from 0 - 7.
 Elements are placed in groups according to the number of electrons they have in their
 outermost shell. The outermost shell electrons are called the valence electrons. Look at 
 group 1 for instance, you will see elements like lithium(Li), sodium(Na), potassium(K)... these
 elements all have 1 electron in their outermost shell. Beryllium and the other elements in 
 group 2 have two electrons in their outermost shell. Group three elements have 3 elements in 
 their outermost shell. So the group number is equal to the valences of the elements in that group
 You get the idea, i suppose. But what of group 0, do they also have 0 electrons their outermost shell?
 No, they don't. This is the exception. All the group 0 elements have eight electrons in their
 outermost shell except helium which has two electrons. Group 0 elements are called the noble or rare 
 gases.
 Between groups 2 and 3 are 10 groups of elements called the Transition Metals. These elements have
 d-orbitals that is partially filled.

 periods.
 Elements are placed in periods according to the number of electron shells they have.
 The periods are the horizontal row of elements in the Periodic table.
 The periods are numbered 1 - 7.
 Period 1 contain two elements : hydrogen(H) and helium(He)
 periods 2 contains eight elements: Li, Be, B, C, N, O, F, Ne.
 period 3 contains eight elements: Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl, Ar.
 periods 4 and 5 contain eighteen elements each.
 periods 6 and 7 contain 32 elements each but only eighteen are included in the rows for proper 
 space management. The rest are cut out and placed at the bottom of the periodic table.They are 
 the lanthanide series and actinide series. They look as if they are not part of the 
 periodic table, the are actually in periods 6 and 7.

 Other terms associated with the periodic table.
 The groups and periods are the main way of classifying elements in the periodic tables but
 but that is not the only way. We can also classify elements as 
 1. Alkali Metals
 2. Alkaline Earth  Metals
 3. The Halogens
 4. The Noble gases or Rare gases or inert elements.

 5. The Transition Metals
 6. The lanthanides
 7. The Actinides
 8. The Artificial elements.
 9. The Metals
 10. The Non-Metals.
 11. The Metalloid.
 12. The blocks

 1. Alkali Metals.
 These are elements in group 1. They are referred to as a family because they behave alike chemically.
 They include such elements as sodium and potassium.
 They have one valence electron and hence univalent.They donate 
 this electron with ease making them a good reducing agent. 
 They react with cold water rapidly liberating hydrogen gas and forming alkali. 
 This is how they got their names.

 2. Alkaline Earth Metals.
 These are the elements in group 2 of the period table.
 They include such elements as calcium and magnesium. Each of their atoms have two 
 valence electrons hence they are divalent. They are reducing in nature being electron
 donors.They form electrovalent compounds.
 Ca ---> Ca2+ + 2e-
 Mg ---> Mg2+ + 2e-

 3. The Halogens.
 The Halogens are the elements in group 7. They rarely exist as free elements
 in nature because they are very reactive. They are the most reactive non-metals known.
 Each of their atoms have 7 valence electrons which is the attribute responsible
 for their similarities in chemical properties. They ionize to form univalent anion which racts 
 with metals to form electrovalent compounds.

 4. The Noble gases or Rare gases or inert elements.
 These are the group 0 elements. They include helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon and radon.
 They have zero electron ready for bounding in their outermost shell, hence the group is named 
 group 0. Due to this lack of bonding electrons, they are nonreactive and exist freely as 
 monoatomic molecules in the atmosphere.

  5. The Transition Metals
  These family of elements are located between groups 2 and 3 of the periodic table.
  They all have partially filled d-orbital which is responsible for most of their chemical
  properties. They are all metals and possess typical metallic properties such as 
  high tensile strength and high melting points. Their valences are usually varaiable and they 
  can form complex and coloured ions.

   6. The lanthanides
   These elements are located in the sixth period beginning with lanthanum(La), and ending
   with lutetium(Lu). They are a set of fifteen rare elements.

   7. The Actinides
   They are placed in the seventh period beginning with actinium(Ac) and end with Law..(Lr)
   This family includes the element uranium which is used in nuclear reactions

    8. The Artificial elements.
    These are the elements which come after uranium in the periodic table.
    They are not natural occurring. They were discovered as products formed during 
    nuclear reactions. They not stable. They include plutonium(Pu) and curium(Cm) 
 9. The Metals
 Metals are located to the left of the diagonal line traversing the periodic table
 at  the far right. Examples include silver, gold, zinc, copper, tin, mercury.
 Metals forms ions by electron lose. across a period from right to left, the metallic properties
 of elements increases while down a group - from to to bottom, the metallic characters increases.
 Metals are shiny, excellent conductors of heat and electricity, malleable and ductile.


10. The Non-Metals.
 Metals are located to the right of the diagonal line traversing the periodic table
 at  the far right. Examples include nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, chlorine.
 Non-metals usually ionize by electron gain. Non-metals are poor conductors of heat and 
 electricity. They are brittle.

  11. The Metalloid.
  Metals are located on the diagonal line traversing the periodic table
 at  the far right. Examples include boron and silicon. They are mainly semi-conductors.
 Their properties are intermediates between those of metals and non-metals.

 12. The blocks
 Elements in the periodic table can also be classified into blocks:
 The s-block, p-block, d-block and the f-block.
 s-block
 The groups 1 and 2 elements make up the s-block.
 They have their outermost electrons in the s orbitals.

p-blocks
Groups 3-7 and 0 form the p-block
d-block
The Transition Metals form the d-block
f-block
The lanthanides and actinides  between groups 2 and 3 
and in period 6 form the f-block.







