Atoms and subatomic particles

Instructional Objectives
At the end of this lesson the student should be able to:
1. State the definition of matter.
2. State two kinds of changes that matter can undergo
3. State the Dalton's Atomic theory
4. State the parts of Dalton's atomic theory that requires amendments.
5. List the subatomic particles
6. Compare the subatomic particles using their mass, charge, location within the atom as basis.
7. Calculate the mass number of an atom given the number of protons and number of neutrons.
8. Calculate the atomic mass of an element given the element's isotopic's masses and their relative abundance.
9. explain why credit for the atomic theory is given to John Dalton even though the idea of
 matter being made of atoms was
first conceived by Democritus.

In the previous lesson Chemistry was defined as science which studies matter 
- its composition, properties, and interactions with other matter as well as with energy.
Matter is anything that has mass and occupies space. 
Since Chemistry studies matter,
a clear understanding of the composition of matter is therefore necessary. 
Dalton's atomic theory does not only reveal
the composition of matter, it also explains what happen when matter undergoes chemical changes.
Dalton's atomic theory relates the events of chemical change to the properties, structure and behavior of atoms.

For chemical change - a change during which new substance is formed - to occur, matter must interact with other matter 
or with energy. For instance, Sodium metal, a matter, can interact with water another matter to produce Sodium hydroxide
Cooking gas, propane can interact with heat, an energy to produce carbon dioxide and water. Hydrogen can react with 
oxygen to produce water. Matter can also undergo a change without producing a new substance. This is called a physical
change.  For instance, water can change state from solid(ice) to liquid and then to gas. In this case, no new substance
is formed.

Dalton's Atomic theory
1. Matter is composed of tiny particles called atoms.
2. Atoms are indivisible and indestructible.
3. Atoms of a particular element are identical.
4. Atoms of different elements are different.
5. Compounds are formed when different atoms combine with one another, and for any particular compound, no matter the source,
its constituent atoms constant and  will always occur in constant ratio.
6. During the formation of compounds atoms are neither created nor destroyed but simply re-arrange themselves. 

Modification of Dalton's Atomic Theory.
The findings of other researchers after John Dalton, especially those of J.J. Thomson and Ernest Rutherford
 have shown that Dalton's Atomic Theory is not completely correct. Dalton understood what matter contains and what happens
 when matter interacts with one another but did not completely understand what the atoms themselves contain.
 It is still true that matter is composed of atoms. It true that during most non-nuclear reactions atoms are neither 
 created nor destroyed but merely re-arrange themselves to form new compounds. It is still true that different atoms
 exist. It it true that atoms of the same element are similar in many ways, for instance they are have the same number of 
 protons , and therefore the same atomic number  but it is not true that atoms of the same element are identical. 
 Atoms of the same elements can show variation 
 in their number of neutrons -  a phenomenon called isotopy. Isotopes are atoms of the same element with the same
 number of protons but different number of neutrons. For example, all Carbon atoms have six protons in their nucleus,
 but majority of the carbon atoms have 6 neutrons in their nucleus - Carbon-12, while some of the carbon atoms have 8 
 neutrons - Carbon-14  in their nucleus.

 It is not also true that atoms are indivisible. Dalton'S model of atom as a solid mass is not correct. 
 The divisibility of matter can go beyond the atom to subatomic particles. Atoms is made of of mostly empty space 
 with a central nucleus which contains the positively charged protons and the non-charged neutrons with peripherally
 located negative  electrons.  


 Subatomic Particles
 //Show table of the sub atomic particles
 The  type of subatomic particle, their location in the atom, as well as their charges and mass is shown in the 
 table above.
  protons
  protons are located in the nucleus of the atom. It has a mass of about 1.67 * 10-24 grams. 
  This mass is equal to one atomic mass unit(amu). It is also equal to the mass of one neutron. One atomic mass unit is also equal to the  1/12 the mass of one 
  atom of carbon-12. This atom has 6 protons and 6 neutrons. Protons contribute significantly to the mass of the atom.
  Protons have a charge of +1. All atoms of a given element have the same number of protons in their nucleus which will 
  different from the number of protons in the atoms of another element. For example, all atoms of hydrogen have 
  one proton in their nucleus, all atoms of Helium has two protons in their nucleus, no other element other than Helium
  will have atoms with two protons in their nucleus and no other element other than hydrogen will have atoms with 1 proton
  in their nucleus. You get the idea, hopefully. Therefore elements derive their identity from the number of protons in their nucleus.
 The  number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is defined as the atomic number of the atom.

The Neutrons.
LIKE The protons, the neutrons are located in the nucleus of the atom.
They have approximately the same mass as protons but no charge.
Atoms of the same element can have different number of neutrons.
but must have the same number of protons.
The the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of and atom is called the mass number of the atom.

The electrons.
The electrons are located in the orbitals outside the nucleus.They have a mass of 1/1800 amu and a charge of -1.
In a neutral atom, The number of electrons in the orbitals is equal to the number of protons in the nucleus. An atom
can gain or lose electron. When this occurs, the atom becomes an ion. Ions are charged atoms. positively charged ions 
are called cations while negatively charged ions are called anions.

How atoms are represented
Atoms are represented in a shorthand format which makes it easy to see the subatomic particles present.
Atoms can be represented in three ways:
1. A/Z Format.
2. Symbol-mass format.
3. Name-mass format.

1.   A/Z Format.
In this format, the symbol of the element is written and then the Atomic number(Z) and the mass number(A)
are together written to the left of it. The value of "Z" is written as a subscript while that of "A" is written
as a superscript.
Using this symbol, we can represent the three Isotopes of hydrogen- Hydrogen, Deuterium and Tritium as:
11H, 21H, 31H. 
Chromium atom can be represented as 52,24Cr

2. Name-mass format.
In this format, the full name of the atom is written first, followed by a hyphen, 
followed by the mass number of the atom.
Using this format, the isotopes of carbon can be represented as follows.
Carbon-12, Carbon-14,  

3. Symbol-mass format.
The atomic symbol is written first followed by a hyphen then followed by the mass number.
Like the Name-mass format, the atomic number is also excluded.
example.
C-12, Cr-52

How to calculate the atomic mass.
The atomic mass of an element is the weighted average mass of all the naturally occurring isotopes present
in the sample of the element.
To calculate the atomic mass of an element, you have to remember that atoms of the same 
element may not identical. They can have different masses and these masses may be abundant in different percentages.
Procedure:
1. Identify the naturally occurring isotopes of the element given in the question.
2. Identify the masses of those isotopes, label them mass1, mass2 etc
3. Identify the relative abundance of those masses. % of mass1, % of mass2 etc

Use the formula:
Atomic mass= (%)(mass1) +   (%)(mass2) +(%)(mass3)  
Example
Boron has two naturally occurring isotopes.
In a sample of Boron, 20 % of the atoms are B-10, which is an isotope of boron with 5 neutrons and mass of 10 amu.
The other 80% of the atoms are B-11, which is an isotope of boron with 6 neutrons and mass of 11 amu.
 What is the atomic mass of boron.
 Solution
 1. The naturally occurring isotopes of boron given in the question are B-10  And B-11.
 2. B-10 has a mass of 10 amu while B-11 has a mass of 11 amu.
 3. majority of boron(80%) atoms are B-11, while 20% are B-10 
 4. Even without doing any calculation, is clear the atomic mass of boron will be closer to 11 than to 10 
5. use the formula:
Atomic mass= (%)(mass1) +   (%)(mass2) +(%)(mass3)  
Atomic mass= (0.20)(10)+ (0.80)(11)=10.8 amu
 

Pre-Dalton idea of atom.
Long before Dalton stated his atomic theory, the Greek Philosopher Democritus and his teacher Leucipus had already
arrived at the conclusion that matter is composed of atoms which are indivisible. They even stated that the way these 
atoms arrange and re-arrange themselves was responsible for the different kinds of matter present. Then why is credit 
for the atomic theory given to Dalton instead of them? The answer is that they relied on logical thinking instead of
observation and experimentation to arrive at their findings. Dalton had experimental data to support his claims. Dalton 
used data from his own experiments and those of other scientist like Antonio Lavioser who discovered the law of conservaton
of mass and Joseph Proust who discovered the law of definite proportions to obtain his theory.

Summary
Tiny particles called atom make up matter.
The way  atoms arrange and re-arrange themselves during chemical
 change is responsible for the different kinds of matter around us.
 
 Different atoms combine to form matter in a constant and predictable proportions.
 Atoms are indivisible. 
 Different atoms exist but in a particular element the atoms are identical- This is Dalton's Atomic theory.
 But it is now known that atoms of the same element are not identical. 
 They can vary in their number of neutrons-a phenomenon called isotopy.
 It is also now known that atom contains subatomic particles: protons, neutrons and electrons- 
 atoms are therefore  
 divisible. The atom  contains mostly an empty with a central nucleus which contain the protons and the 
 neutrons while the electrons are located in the orbitals outside the nucleus.
 The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is defined as the atomic number(Z) of the atom.
 The sum of the number of protons plus the number of neutrons is the mass number(A) of the atom.
 In a an uncharged atom the number of protons is equal to the number of electron.
 An ion is an atom that has lost or gained electron.
 The atomic mass of an element is the weighted average of the masses of its  isotopes.
 The idea that matter is composed of atoms had  been conceived long before Dalton by Democritus but unlike 
 Dalton Democritus had no experimental data to support his claims.
 


Review questions
1. Bromine atom, a halogen, has an atomic symbol of Br. It has 35 electrons, 35 protons and 45 neutrons.
Which of the following options correctly represent this description of bromine in A/Z format.
A.  45,35 Br b  80,45 Br c  35, 45Br d 4545Br e none of the above

2. 1. Mercury, a transition metal , has an atomic symbol of Hg. It has 80 electrons, 80 protons and 121 neutrons.
Which of the following options correctly represent this description of Mercury in A/Z format.
A.  Hg-201 b  Mercury-201 c  201,80 d 80,80Hg e  160,80Hg


 3. Which element  has 19 protons. (You may need to consult the periodic table) 

 4.  36,17Cl, 58,26 Fe, and C-14 respectively have how many number of neutrons
 A 



